# Data Engineering Nano Degree by Udacity
## Project 4 - Data Lake
### Introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
### Project Description
The task is building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.
### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

### Here are the S3 links for each:

* Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
* Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### Fact Table
1. **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
   * _songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent_

#### Dimension Tables
1. **users** - users in the app
   * _user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level_
2. **songs** - songs in music database
   * _song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration_
3. **artists** - artists in music database
   * _artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude_
4. **time** - timestamps of records in **songplays** broken down into specific units
   * _start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday_


## Project Template
In addition to the data files, the project workspace includes three files:

1. `etl.py` reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3. **!!!Update before run.**
2. `dl.cfg` contains your AWS credentials. **!!!Update before run.**
4. `README.md` provides discussion on this project.


## How to run the project

**!!!First the config file needs to be updated with the processing EMR cluster access details. Also the etl.py main function requires the target S3 bucket added.** Then the below script can be run:
```sh
root@xyz:home/workspace# python etl.py
```

We can check the results on the target S3 bucket after the script run successfully.